=head1 GBROWSE FAQ

Frequently asked questions - with answers.

=over 4

=item When I search, why doesn't GBrowse find my 3-letter gene name?

If you are using the MySQL GFF adaptor and are storing gene names
inside Note attributes, then you may bump up against MySQL's default
four-letter limit on full text searches. To fix this, either:

  1. Put the gene name in an Alias attribute, e.g. "Alias LEP"

or

  2. Change MySQL to allow searches on 3-character words.

The latter solution is a multi-step process:

  1. Open /etc/my.cnf and add the following configuration line
     to the [mysqld] stanza:

         ft_min_word_len=3

  2. Restart the mysql server.

  3. Connect to your database using the mysql command-line client
     and run the command:

         mysql> repair table fattribute_to_feature quick;

=item How do I use semantic zooming to hide a track completely?

If you wish to turn off a track entirely, you can use the "hide" flag
to hide the track when the display exceeds a certain size:

  [6_frame_translation:50000]
  hide = 1

=item I have a multi-segmented feature (such as a multi-exon transcript). It looks fine at low power, but when I zoom in the connecting lines between segments disappear. Help!

You need to structure the feature in such a way that it has a single
parent part that spans the whole feature from end to end, and then use
the appropriate aggregator. For example, the "match" aggregator looks
for a parent feature of type "match" and subpart features of type
"HSP." So the GFF file you load should look like this:

  Chr1 . match  1  1000 . . . ID=Hit27
  Chr1 . HSP    1   200 . . . Parent=Hit27
  Chr1 . HSP  500   600 . . . Parent=Hit27
  Chr1 . HSP  900  1000 . . . Parent=Hit27

In GFF2 format, the example will look like this:

  Chr1 . match  1  1000 . . . Hit Hit27
  Chr1 . HSP    1   200 . . . Hit Hit27
  Chr1 . HSP  500   600 . . . Hit Hit27
  Chr1 . HSP  900  1000 . . . Hit Hit27


For transcripts, use the "processed_transcript" aggregator and create
features with a main part of "mRNA" and subparts of "CDS", "exon",
and/or various types of UTRs.


=item Why are there so few questions in the FAQ?

Because I just started this document.

=back

$Id: FAQ.pod,v 1.1.2.3 2005-09-23 15:29:49 lstein Exp $


