=head1 GenBank HOWTO 

This is a quick synopsis of the steps needed to initialize a GBrowse
database from a genbank record.  For the purposes of illustration, we
will use the RefSeq record for M. bovis, accession NC_002945.

=head1 Using the GBrowse in-memory database 

=head2 1. Convert from Genbank format into GFF format

Download the Genbank record and convert it into GFF format.  You can
do this easily using the bp_genbank2gff.pl script, which is part of
Bioperl (scripts/Bio-DB-GFF/genbank2gff.pl):

   bp_genbank2gff.pl -stdout -accession NC_002945 > mbovis.gff

This will download the record for M. bovis (refseq NC_002945)
and save it to the file mbovis.gff.

If you already have the genbank record available as a file named
NC_002945.gb, you can convert it like this:

   bp_genbank2gff.pl -stdout -file NC_002945.gb > mbovis.gff

The newly-converted file uses GFF3 format, which combines feature data
with sequence/DNA data.  This means that you do not need a separate
FASTA file for the sequence.

=head2 2. Install the GFF file into the databases directory

Copy this file into your in-memory GFF databases directory, as
described in the tutorial.  We will assume
/usr/local/apache/htdocs/gbrowse/databases.

  mkdir /usr/local/apache/htdocs/gbrowse/databases/mbovis
  chmod o+rwx /usr/local/apache/htdocs/gbrowse/databases/mbovis
  cp mbovis.gff /usr/local/apache/htdocs/gbrowse/databases/mbovis

=head2 3. Set up the configuration file

Use the configuration file 08.genbank.conf as your starting template.
This is located in contrib/conf_files:

  cp contrib/conf_files/08.genbank.conf /usr/local/apache/conf/gbrowse.conf/mb.conf

=head2 4. Edit the configuration file as appropriate

You will need to change the [GENERAL] section to use the in-memory
adaptor and to point to the location of the M. bovis GFF file:

 [GENERAL]
 description   = Mycobacterium Bovis In-Memory
 db_adaptor    = Bio::DB::GFF
 db_args       = -adaptor memory
	         -dir     /usr/local/apache/htdocs/gbrowse/databases/mbovis

You might also want to change the "examples" tag to introduce the
accession number for the whole genome, and a few choice gene names and
search terms:

  examples = NC_002945 Mb1800 galT glucose

That's all there is to it, but since this is a pretty big chunk of DNA
(> 4 Mbp), it uses a considerable amount of memory and performance
will be sluggish unless you have a fast machine with lots of memory.
So you might wish to view it using a MySQL, PostgreSQL or Oracle
database.  The following are instructions for doing this.

=head1 Using the GBrowse GFF database with Mysql

We will assume that you are using a MySQL database.

=head2 1. Create the database

Create the database using mysqladmin:

  mysqladmin create mbovis

As described in the GBrowse tutorial, give yourself write permission for the
database, and give the web server user (e.g. "nobody") select
permission.

=head2 2. Convert from Genbank format into GFF format and load it into the database

The bp_genbank2gff.pl script can download the accession, convert it
into GFF and load the database directly in one smooth step:

  bp_genbank2gff.pl -create -dsn mbovis -accession NC_002945

If you prefer, you can do this in two steps by first creating the gff
file as described for the in-memory adaptor, and then using Bioperl's
bp_bulk_load_gff.pl or bp_fast_load_gff.pl.

If you are using a PostgreSQL or Oracle database, you must specify the
appropriate adaptor to bp_genbank2gff.pl:

  bp_genbank2gff.pl -create -dsn mbovis -adaptor dbi::oracle -accession NC_002945

=head2 3. Set up the configuration file

Use the configuration file 08.genbank.conf as your starting template.
This is located in contrib/conf_files:

  cp contrib/conf_files/08.genbank.conf /usr/local/apache/conf/gbrowse.conf/mb.conf

=head2 4. Edit the configuration file as appropriate

You will need to change the [GENERAL] section to use the appropriate
database adaptor:

 [GENERAL]
 description   = Mycobacterium Bovis Database
 db_adaptor    = Bio::DB::GFF
 db_args       = -adaptor dbi::mysql
	        -dsn     dbi:mysql:database=mbovis;host=localhost
                -user    nobody
		-passwd  ""

You might also want to change the "examples" tag to introduce the
accession number for the whole genome, and a few choice gene names and
search terms:

  examples = NC_002945 Mb1800 galT glucose

That should be it!

=head2 NOTE

You can load as many accessions into the database as you like.
Each one will appear as a "chromosome" named after the accession
number of the entry.
