=head1 INSTALL NOTES for Microsoft Windows platforms

Installation currently has only been tested on Windows 2000 and XP.  If you install
on another platform successfully, please let me know so I can add it to the
list.

=head2 Obtaining the source code

Currently, only the CVS version of GBrowse is compatible with Windows. 
The CVS version of GBrowse can be checked out in Windows using a Windows CVS
client.  Here are directions for checking out anonymously using WinCVS
(http://www.wincvs.org/) (for directions for doing it as a developer,
see the documentation on SourceForge).  Note that when you checkout
anonymously, there is no way to commit code changes.  After obtaining
and installing WinCVS, under the 'Admin' menu, select 'Preferences' and
set cvsroot exactly as it appears on the line below:

  :pserver:anonymous@cvs.gmod.sourceforge.net:/cvsroot/gmod

Then, under 'Create' menu, select 'Checkout module', and enter
'Generic-Genome-Browser' and select a local folder for it to be
checked out to.

=head2 Installation

Obtain the prerequisite software listed in the L<INSTALL> document.  I advise
using precompiled binaries where available, including Apache, Activestate Perl,
and MySQL.  For installing Perl modules, I recommend using Activestate's 
PPM tool L<http://www.activestate.com>, including for installing BioPerl. 
See the INSTALL.WIN document in BioPerl's top directory for an excellent
guide to installing both Perl and BioPerl.  A test PPM version of gbrowse
is available at L<http://stein.cshl.org/ppm>.  If you find that you cannot
follow these recommendations, you are pretty much on your own, and be sure
you have a compiler :-)

For the installation itself, you will need Microsoft's nmake utility.  It can
be obtained from Microsoft's website at
http://download.microsoft.com/download/vc15/Patch/1.52/W95/EN-US/Nmake15.exe
which will download an installer.  Note that the resulting NMAKE.EXE and
NMAKE.ERR should be in the System32 folder to work properly.

The installation goes mostly as described in the L<INSTALL> document.  In order
for the Makefile to work correctly, when making the Makefile with Makefile.PL,
directories delimiters can either be forward slashes (/) or backslashes (\)
which are usually used in Windows operating systems.  Also, I recommend
using short file names for paths, as the longer filenames have
spaces in them that sometimes cause problems, therefore, the installation
procedure may look something like this:

C:\GENERI~1.47> perl Makefile.PL PREFIX=C:/PROGRA~1/APACHE~1/APACHE
C:\GENERI~1.47> nmake
C:\GENERI~1.47> nmake install

This will copy the GBrowse configuration, html, and cgi files to the correct
directories in the Apache directory.

=head2 MySQL notes

Be sure to set up MySQL as a service as described in the MySQL documentation,
so that MySQL is started up on boot and properly shutdown before the operating
system halts.  Also be sure to add MySQL's bin directory to your PATH
environment variable.  Typically, it is C:\mysql\bin.

=head2 Bulk upload notes

=over

=item *

Note that you must use the --create option to use bulk_load_gff.pl. 

=item *

You must use a reasonably recent version of bulk_load_gff.pl.  The current
cvs version should be fine, but the version in BioPerl 1.0.2 is not.  For your
convenience, I have left a working copy of bulk_load_gff.pl in the contrib/
directory.

=item *

Be sure that the modules you need are actually installed in your Activestate
Perl.  I found the PPM 'thought' that they were installed, but really there
was a package list and nothing else.  I found this to be the case with both
DBI and DBD::Mysql.  I had to use PPM to remove the modules and install them
again and then they worked.  Also make sure that your system's TMP environment
variable (set in the System control panel) points to a writable directory.

=back

Scott Cain
cain@cshl.org
1/8/2003

