Support for various databases and database schemas are coming.  Right
now, there is full support for the Bio::DB::GFF schema running on
MySQL, preliminary support for the Bio::DB::GFF schema running on top
of Oracle, and preliminary support for the BioSQL schema running on
top of MySQL.  There is also support for the GadFly schema running on
top of MySQL and PostgreSQL, but this uses an earlier (forked) version
of GBrowse.  See README-berkeley-gadfly for more details.

Bio::DB::GFF on Oracle
----------------------

To run GBrowse on top of Oracle, you will need a recent version of
BioPerl that contains Shuly Avraham's
Bio::DB::GFF::Adaptor::dbi::Oracle adaptor.  Create the database, name
it, and set access permissions.  Then run the load_gff.pl script to
initialize and load it with the GFF data:

 load_gff.pl -c -adaptor dbi::Oracle -dsn dbi:oracle:database=<db_service> file.gff

Replace <db_service> with the service definition for your database.
You will probably also have to provide the -user and -pass options.

The next step is to tell GBrowse to use the Oracle database.  In the
[GENERAL] section, enter the following values for db_adaptor and
db_args:


    db_adaptor = Bio::DB::GFF
    db_args = -dsn     dbi:mysql:database=<service_name>;host=<host>
              -adaptor dbi::Oracle
              -user    <username>
              -pass    <password>

Replace <service_name>, <host>, <username> and <password> with the
values appropriate for your system.

BioSQL on MySQL
---------------

To run GBrowse on top of BioSQL, you will need a recent version of
BioPerl that has the DAS (distributed annotation system) interface
files.  Initialize and load your BioSQL database according to the
directions in the biosql-schema and bioperl-db distributions.

Use the following db_adaptor and db_args options as templates for your
GBrowse configuration file:

db_adaptor  = Bio::DB::Das::BioSQL
db_args     = driver    mysql
	      dbname    <dbname>
	      biodbname <biodbname>
	      host      <hostname>
	      user      <username>
              password  <password>

Replace the values in angle brackets with the appropriate values.  A
working configuration file can be found in conf/06.biosql.conf

NOTE:

These GBrowse adaptors are really experimental.  Don't expect them to
work right off.  Please contact Lincoln Stein if you have any
questions or problems.

Lincoln Stein
<lstein@cshl.org>
